# Notes on RfP in 2019
---

## To do:
To do:

- function for fold changes (FC)
- compare msgf vs mascot
- subset peptide MSnSet to extract one protein (ideally like Similarity view in Scaffold), table of all the peptides that identifies a protein in all the samples
- we could make function for that from rfp6/S03_code_prot.R


---

## July 2019
## Thoughts after Laurent's visit 

While we still remember the details of our the latest version, there are my comments:
-1- Conceptually, we drive our pipeline to obtain differential expression values for proteins. This is first thing of course, but there are other goal. I hope it will not be too difficult to get peptide fold changes within proteins to check if all assigned peptides show the same fold change and pattern in different samples. In fact, was this the picture you were showing that it is coming?

-2- To assess our latest version I need comparable psm MSnSet. But our function do not retain it. I learned that R can return only one object. Since we are already building list of protein MSnSets, it does not seem practical to mix it with another list psm MSnSets. That means we have to run it twice. The easiest seems copying the code below and remove the combineFeature, where we collapse it to protein MSnSet. But feels neither consize nor elegant. What would be a better way?
This part will always be needed. 
When we are done with numbers, we will visualize selected fold changes, based on which we take accession of interest and plot and interrogate the corresponding peptides manually to check how well the fragments are assigned.
We this all the time with phosphopeptides.

-3- Phosphopeptides, currently I can get them from peptide or psm MSnSet. This is another reason to make this object. But what we woudl have to change in order to count them in spectral counting?

-4- Try to append unique list peptides to every protein.

-5- Combine feature has a weakness that it does not retain the best peptide hit. We should retain the best spectrum for every charge state for every protein. Then we should be able to find how this spectrum was in all the samples and get its intensity. (Count, TMT, value, or XIC)

-6- The problem of common peptides in protein groups would be better to expand in a separate table of accessions vs peptides. Then unique peptides should be labeled, possibly score of PSM match coudl be added.

-7- Table of protein description will be needed. Typical situation will be: a protein has fold change difference between samples, but it is a member of a protein group. We need to show description of all proteins from this groups. We do not have this currently in Scaffold!!

 
 -8- Peptide-centric view:
 Peptides asigned to protein in every sample 
 
        smpl1  smpl2   smpl3
 pep1   x       x       x
 pep2   x       x       -
 pep3   -       -       x
 
 It could be score, expr value, spectral count.
 
Note: Check the lists made by aggregate...

-9-
All what we have done is just a fixture for what is missing in the function 'as_MSnSet(msnid,fcol="accession)' Shouldn't we add it to it?  



## 30th July, train to/from Cambridge

- Is there any difference in Master protein and accession_smpl.index
- Is 'master protein' the same for every sample or is it different?
- Ultimate control: if exprs values are replaced by the actual peptide sequences - will the numbers match?
-- How to append several columnes to a dataframe?
-- How to quickly compare two columns in a dataframe?
- Accession => all peptides for all or only selected samples => how many unique peptides, charge states, modifications, total SPC, list of peptides, distribution among samples. This will help to set up filters. All this needs to go to feature data and will be used to filter MSnSet to obtain subsets, e.g. all proteins of selected pair that have at least two unique peptides.
- feature data after combining features should contain master peptide with maximum ion score. All the other should be accessible simply on demand.
- Fold changes function, output: pictures (Venn diagram, S-shaped bar plot, MA plot), list of proteins
- Final WF should be modular: exp-table, FDR, QC, FC,...
- What to move to the library? E.g. FDR, but some FDR visualization is useful and missing from the current function. Also, sometimes it needs to be modified. A good compromise is to move to the library the most typical calculation for tryptic peptides, and change when necessary manually when required.
Another bit that would be really useful to move to a function or a library is protein grouping, it is quite ugly. If we could have the workflow made from logical blocks and move the messy code inside to the library would improve readability.
- peptide centric MSnSet: combined peptides where in the feature data we leave the best hits
- combine feature data to retain modifications and or charge states

## 5th August 2019
## WHAT TO DO NEXT MONDAY

- accesion ~ peptide list (where to get it from)
- which peptides are asigned exclusively to a protein => presumably the best result
- from accession~peptide list pick master proteins
- append to fData of master-protein MSnSet
- remove accessions (randomly selected from protein group) - can be done anytime later)
- count sequences and compare to exprs numbers
- sequence coverage plots
- LFC (log fold changes)


## 8th August 2019
## NOTES
### ProteinProphet
  - When proteins lack unique peptides at given FDR level, master protein could be selected based on low scoring spectra. For that reason PSM that is not filtered by FDR should be retained. It looks like inviting of false positives, but we are dropping the threshold to decide protein inference only, not to increase PSM number. This approach relies on high mass accuracy of parent scan and is used only when protein is already identified by other peptides. It is a variationo of older Peptide Mass Fingerprint method, when only precursors are used to detect protein. MF The same approach is used by ProteinPropher algorithm.  

### What is worth saving?
  -  We produce list of MSnSets that we combine later. We can produce peptide MSnSets as well. Protein MSnSets have to be fixed - missing information of protein groups and PSMs that identified proteins. 
  Ideally, I would like to have:
  - individual MSnSets of all samples
  - combined MSnSet
  - all before and after FRD adjustment
  - the same applies to peptide MSnSet and also PSM MSnset, individual and combined across samples.
  In feature data should always be the best of the combined data, be it protein or peptide as well as protein group members. All of it shoudl be linked with raw data to be able to extract spetra from raw data. 

More I think of it, MSnSet seems to me limited in the way that when we combine features we loose connection with data that produced it. We do not see PSMs that made the protein hits. When we aggregate peptide~protein, ideally, we shoujd retain all of it. When combining, we should put in feature data the best spectra of those passing the threshold. We should also keep what peptides made the hit. We should see thise rejected by FRD as well. 



## 27th August 2019

### Problem with common peptides
 
peptide accession    master
pep1    acc1          acc1
pep2    acc2          acc2
pep3    acc1, acc2    acc?...which one? 


Are the proteins identified by both unique and common peptides shown as separate groups based on their unique peptides? Or is one master selected based on spectral count and they all live in one large group? I believe latter is the case and I think we should keep them separately. All protein matches that have unique peptides should have their own rows in combined MSnSet, for the reason they can be quantified by those unique peptides. That means we will have to repeat the common accessions in those related subgroups. It would be good to keep the information of the super groups somehow. 

E.g. In the example below there is a super-group with three accessions, Acc1 and Acc2 are unique and therefore separated into two sub-groups. They can be quantified separately (by TMT or spectral count) using only the unique peptides PEPTIDER and APEPTIDEK. What shall we do with the common (ambiguous) peptides? We can either add them to the most abundant one or keep them separately.
In the former case, the coverage then goes after the higher number (coverage) of unique peptides. I hope this is reasonable. Perhaps compare the abundance trends of common peptides intensity would be better. Or keep a super-group together as higher leverl of combining features?

### SAMPLE1:

**Accession|Peptide|Spectral_count|Unique|Group|Master**  

Acc1            PEPTIDER  	    5 	        TRUE         Acc1 			    x

Acc2            APEPTIDEK   	1           TRUE         Acc2				x

Acc1            AAAAK           1           FALSE        Acc1,Acc2,Acc3		-

Acc2            AAAAK           1           FALSE        Acc1,Acc2,Acc3		-

Acc3            AAAAK           1           FALSE        Acc1,Acc2,Acc3		-


### SAMPLE2:

**Accession|Peptide|Spectral_count|Unique|Group|Master**  

Acc1            PEPTIDER  	    1 	        TRUE         Acc1 			   	x

Acc2            APEPTIDEK     	5           TRUE         Acc2				x

Acc1            AAAAK           1           FALSE        Acc1,Acc2,Acc3		-

Acc2            AAAAK           1           FALSE        Acc1,Acc2,Acc3		-

Acc3            AAAAK           1           FALSE        Acc1,Acc2,Acc3		-



After we combineFeatures and  samples, the total spectal counts looks like:
What we do with the aditional peptide? We add it to the more abundant one. 

**Accession|SMPL1|SMPL2|super-group|peptides|total_unique_pep|total_pep**

Acc1	5+1     	1 	  	Acc1,Acc2,Acc3		pep1, pep3		1			2  
Acc2	1           5+1		Acc1,Acc2,Acc3		pep2, pep3		1			2  
total	7			7  

Now Acc1, Acc2, Acc3 clearly share common peptide, while they are different proteins with different abundance. 

How about a super-group, would it be useful? 
 
Further 'super-group'ing after features from different samples were combined can hide the differences between samples. For that reason we keep unique proteins separatelly, then distribute the remaining peptides.
Still, it would be good to index proteins with some commonalities by supergroups No. It will show where the common peptides had to be divided among master proteins.  It visualizes complexity and flaws of bottom up proteomics.


Btw, PeptideProphet goes even further, using older technology, Peptide Mass Fingerprint to decide protein ambiguity. It uses peptides below FDR thresold to help decide protein inference problem. (not to increase number of hits) I believe this is right thing to do. When we know a protein exists, it it is reasonable to assume there will be peptides with correct mass and poor tandem spectrum. High mass accuracy is required here! 

Additionally, we should list the unique peptides for every sample, for every group.
We should list all the peptides as well.
Later, we should be able to find which peptides are modified and how. I hope this will be possible somehow. Now with spectral counting we use sequences only, but spectral counts of e.g. phosphopeptides in different samples are of great interest.
Another useful table is: 
 
 **Acc1|Acc2|Acc3**
pep1	5		1		1		
pep2	1		5		1		
pep3	1		1		1		

In Scaffold it is called Similarity.




## 28th August 2019

### How to deal with protein groups quantification

1. Quantify super-group
2. Quantify proteins with unique peptides using unioque peptides only
3. Quantify the rest of the group using common peptides as one protein
4. Add ambiguous peptides to the protein with highest number of unique peptides.

- 2: is going to give the best quantification, but for spectral count may not be enough to show a differences.
- 3,1: may not be good as several proteins can contribute
- if all 1,2,3 show the same trend, this is seems significant and  the master protein is what is there 
- 4: problem is we do not know where from the common peptides came. Assigning them to a most abundant protein may work but may produce false abundances. Perhaps we should split and share the intensity of ambiguous peptides to all proteins with unique peptides. We can use the coverage with unique peptides to split the numbers. This means that all common sequences will be added to all members of protein group, but only proportion of intensity will be added.

### Concerning protein groups after combining peptide feature

- When we combine features, what is in the protein group?
- Do we know which peptides are unique and which are comon? E.g. 5u-2u-1-1-1
- Do we know that protein belongs to a group when no common peptides are addded (because they were added to some other member)? 

- How to make combineFeatures keep the most important peptides in feature data? It is not useful to have ion score of PSM of the first peptide, we want the best one!




## 12th September 2019

- we need to save all the data, any format to be able to check the final result
- possibilities:
-- dataframes before and after FDR filtering
-- list od MSnSets, PSM, peptide, protein level
-- combined in one MSnSet
-- combined MSnSet


## 12th December 2019; for meeting in Brussels


1) Protein inference visualization
In the summer we created protein groups and selected master proteins based on the highest spectral count. It works well, but there still a couple of problems. I think it would be better to look at number of unique peptides (UP) per protein and if two or more proteins have equal UP, then pick one with higher total spectral count (SP). Which is a small addition.

*Problem: this is still not enough to separate protein groups.*

A bigger problem is that we calculate the groups per sample only. But when we pull samples together, we should re-examine protein grouping and perhaps even a master protein. It is easy to imagine that two separate groups become one due to another sample with protein that joins two groups into one. Which is the nastiness of protein inference problem indeed. I understand it will not go away whatever we do. But what we could do is to show the problem. 
We use **Protein Prophet** implemented in Scaffold all the time and it looks good to me. Tbh, I do not really care whichever algorithm we use, more important is to know how exactly a protein was selected as a hit. Therefore the best we could do is to try to visualize the inference for every protein in a protein group. 
Could we align protein sequences within protein groups and visualize peptides that were detected? What I have in mind is the figure (attached) from a paper that described the protein inference problem: https://www.mcponline.org/content/4/10/1419.long I believe it falls nicely in the RfP scope. Question is, is it doable? Scaffold does not go that far, it shows only a table peptides vs accession. (screenshot attached)
This would help us three times: to evaluate the ambiguity in protein inference (i), to see the alternatives (ii), and to use the protein annotations to speculate on their biological fuctions (iii).  

2) We may need to look at the function that plots binary comparisons of fold changes. 

3) If this is not enough, there are many other things you could help me with.
- MS2 XIC
- Alignment of XICs
- Proper label-free: can you calculate (aligned) precursor ion peak areas intensities (MS1 level)? If this would be easy think to do, I would gladly replace spectral count by this.
- We are buying timsTOF, which has build in variation on ion mobility separation, therefore every peptide has in addition to retention time and m/z also collisional crossection values linked to it. Woudl your older work with Synnapt be compatible with timsTOF data?
- I would love to see comparision of CID and HCD data for every peptide, whenever possible.
- Filter raw file at certain RT +-2min, then filter for precursors m/z>1000, print spectra of top 10 based or total TIC or highest peaks.

To split it in urgrent-important matrix, 1/ 2/ is urgent&important, 3/ is important&not-urgent. 


 -----------------------------------------------------------
...continuing with 1) 

total SPC of two different sample types, CH and PH in mzid-data.table and exprs(e) are the same. But when counting total peptides in protein_groups in the samples, the number is smaller. Does it mean the counts are unique peptides instead of total spectral count? 
It seems it is not, pepSeqUniqueCount for all the samples for "35a12" only 13, the number is never reached for any accession. 

*I think total SPC is not enough to select master protein.*
When we add number of unique peptides, it may not be enough either.
We should use score to select for the best ones too.
We should even use the number of low scoring peptides to decide which proteins from the protein_group are more likely.
How to draw the threshold though?
Anything that has something unique should be listed.
Count the peptides which are unique to a protein (proteotypic, bold-red)
PROTEINS WITH PROTEOTYPIC PEPTIDE SHOULD BE LISTED AS MASTERS.
There may be more than one par group.
We should count groups. 1,2,3,...
We need to data-mine protein descriptions. 

----------------------------------------------

## 19th December 2019; after the trip 

##### Highlights & plans


1. We ditched **master proteins** - they are not real.

2. We defined protein groups by calculating protein-protein distances as **"Jaccard index"**, "JI", comparing sequence coverage for each protein using peptide spectral counts.

 ##### Connection with parent group

3. We use "Jaccard index" to cut the clusters to generate more **protein sub-groups**. But we should not loose the connection with the parent group. 
We might get the cut wrong and this is only way to see that there are overlapping proteins identified. We should count non overlapping protein groups 1,2,3,... for JI=0.99. When we use smaller cut off e.g. JI=0.5, we should relabel the groups 1-1,1-2,2-1,2-2,3,... to see which groups could still possibly overlap. This is related to selecting peptides for quantification. See later. 

4. Protein distance **cluster plot**; the plot is too long to visualize; most people do not have two screens. Is there more condensed dendrogram tree available? Otherwise we should split the plot. Presumably by protein groups and print them as an array of smaller plots on the whole page.  

 ##### Low scoring peptides

5. I think it would be worth to try to add **low scoring peptides** (only to decide protein inference) and see if it makes any difference. Then we would have to be able to manually change protein grouping JI threshold and decide whether we wish to add some low scoring peptides or not. This is what is the "shiny" package for isn't it? Have I got carried away a bit? We need a rule of thumb first, then revisit the results and especially the grouping. 
Moreover, to be able to adjust FDR level to allow more  peptides in without increasing number of protein hits is actually useful. Often we are dropping this threshold to find modified peptides that we confirm by SRM later.
  
 ##### New protein-peptide plots

6. In order to be able to decide how to split groups, more information about pertide is needed: **scores**, **m/z**, **z** and **modifications**. I hope we could print it on the plot - there is plenty of space for it. Where to get those data? Directly in msnl, or in mzid combined data table (/rfp6/S01-4_mzid.R)? I will make a drawing how the plot could like. 

7. Also, our protein-peptide plots needs heat-map scale to know which colours correspond to what number of spectral counts.

8. I really like those protein-peptide groups plots, we should use them in a standard report and print them. And we should use them for sample comparisons as well. In a binary comparison, we just need to facet wrap two plots for two different samples. Comparing two proteins with just a single number is nice and simple, but the detail are important: are the peptides of the same or different sequences, miscleavages, charge states, scores, modifications? Is there another subfamily that was separated by our JI cut as well? Because the protein groups are our only true result, we should plot all the details including quantitative values to this plot.   

 ##### Quantification

8. Not to use common peptides in quantification might be a problem. Consider this result for one protein group:  
Sample A has: 1 unique 1 common peptide.  
Sample B has 1 unique and five common peptides.  
If we remove all common peptides, the ratio is 1:1. But the protein in sample B may be genuinely up-regulated and the common peptides are coming from the second allele as we have seen many times. Functionally, it is likely one protein.   
This is of course the hardest problem to decide.  
The only solution is to test which set of peptides behave similarly and use this as something that makes sense in the context of our experiment and our data. We should scatter plot peptides within the groups, for two samples and search for correlation, remove outliers and use this subset for quantification.
The other possibility is to compare certain peptide ratios, using exclusive peptides only (i), using exclusive and semi-exclusive peptides (ii), and then by all peptide including common ones (iii). 
Perhaps this might be another opportunity for a shiny stuff and manual choice what to remove and what to keep group by group. But again, we need to have a reasonable default first.  

9. I better connection to peptide features, to filter out proteins we call "one peptide wonders" and to ensure NAs are in less than 50% of the replicates. The right place to store these filters is fDAta(res). I will try to get these filters, and I fail I will come shouting for help if I am lost. 

10. I tried to wrap all in RMD to print out all the plots, but I am doing something badly. It would make more sense to plot only those differentially changing protein groups.

-----